# Variables and Assignment
Nothing is as simple as `pun.c`...
Most need
- to perform a series of calculations before producing output
- thus also need a way to temporarily store data during execution
- variables!

## Types
- every variable needs a type
- specifies the kind of data it holds
- For now we will limit ourselves to
  - `int` 
  - `float`
- type impacts how variable is stored and what operations we can do with it
  - pick wisely
- type of a numeric variable determines the largest and smallest numbers it can store and whether or not it can be a decimal

`int` == integer
- whole numbers like `0,1,392,-2553` etc.
- cons...
  - range of values is limited
  - max is typically: `2,147,483,647`
  - can be as small as `32,767`

`float` == floating point
- can store way larger numbers than `int`
- can store decimals like `379.125`
- cons...
  - arithmetic on `float` might be slower than on `int`
  - `float` value is often an approximation of the number stored in it
    - ex. `0.1` in a float may later be discovered as `0.099999999999999999999999999999999999987` thanks to rounding error

## Declarations
- variables need to be declared (described for the compiler) before use
- to declare we specify type and then name
Ex.
```
int height; // height is a variable of type int
float profit; // profit is a variable of type float
```
Several variables with the same type can have combined declarations:
```
int height, length, width, volumel
float profit, loss;
```
Each complete declaration ends with a semicolon.
Declarations should precede statements:
```
int main(void){
    declarations
    statements
}
```
Stylistically nice to leave a blank line between declarations and statements
- in C99 declarations don't have to come before statements
- Ex. main might have a delcaration, a statement, and then another declaration
For compatability with older programs it's best to declare everything first 
Common in C++ and Java to not ceclare variables until they're first needed 

## Assignment
- Variables can be given a value via assignment
```
height = 8;
length = 12;
width = 10;
```
- `8,12,10` are "constants"
Before a variable can be assigned a value or used at all it needs to be declared.
Good:
```
int height;
height = 8;
```
Bad:
```
height = 8;
int height;
```
Constants assigned to a float usually contain a decimal, Ex.
```
profit = 2150.48;
```
Best to append the  letter `f` to a constant that contains a decimal if it's assigned to a float
Computer might warn you if you don't
```
profit = 2150.48f
```
Mixing types (assigning an int to a float or vise versa) is possible but not always safe
Once a var is assigned a valye it can be used to compute another var's value

```
height = 8;
length = 12;
width = 10;
volume = height * length * width; // now volume is 960
```

`*` == multiplication in V
the right side of an assignment can be a formula (expression) involving constants, variables, and operators

## Printing the value of a variable
We can use `printf`
Ex. to write the message "Height: *h*" where *h* is the current value of the `height` variable:
```
printf("Height: %d\n", height);
```
`%d` is a placeholder indicating where the value of height is to be filled in during printing.
- works only for int variables
- for a float we'd use `%f` instead
  - by default this displays 6 digits after the decimal
  - if you put `.p` between `%` and `f` you can force it to display `p` digits after the dp
Ex. to print "Profit: $2150.48":
```
printf("Profit: $%.2f\n", profit);
```
No limit to how many variables can be printed by a single call of `printf`
```
printf("Height: %d Length %d\n", height, length);
```
## Initialization
Some variables are set to zero by default when a program begins to execute
- most aren't
- A varwiable without a default value that hasn't yet been assigned is said to be uninitialized

if you try to access the value of an uninitialized variable, it might yield something unpredictable
- or crash

We can give a cariable an initial value during declaraion
```
int height = 8; // 8 is an "initializer"
```
Any number of variables can be initialized in the same declaration
```
int height = 8, length = 12, width = 10; // each variable requires its own initializer.
```
In the following, 10 is only good for width, not length or height
```
int height, length, width = 10;
```

## Printing expressions
`printf` can display the value of any nymeric expression
You could replace:
```
volume = height * length * width
printf("%d\n", volume);
```
with:
```
printf("%d\n", height * length * width);
```
