# Identifiers
Names for variables, functions, macros and other entities == identifiers
In C they can contain
- letters
- digits
- underscores
- must begin with a letter or underscore
- (C99) may contain certain "universal character names" as well

Some legal identifiers:
- `times10` 
- `get_next_char` 
- `_done`

Some illegal identifiers:
- `10times` -> starts with an int
- `get-next-char` -> minus signs

C is case sensitive. These are all different:
- `job`
- `joB`
- `jOb`
- `jOB`
- `Job`
- `JoB`
- `JOb`
- `JOB`

So you could use all these simultaneously for different things. 
since case matters most people, by convention, only use lowercase letters in identifiers (except macros) with underscores when necessary for legibility
Ex.
- `symbol_table`
- `current_page`
- `name_and_address`

Other people do the java thing camelcase
- `symbolTable`
- `currentPage`
- `nameAndAddress`

first letter is sometimes capitalized too
- first style is very common in traditional C
- latter is becoming more popular cuz of Java and C# (and a bit C++)
- just be consistent i guess

C has no limit on the maximum length of an identifier
be descriptive (ex. `current_page` > `cp`)

## Keywords
Keywords have special significance to C compilers and can't be used as identifiers.
Five keywords were added in C99.
Table 2.1 in the book.
```
auto, enum, restrict, unsigned, break, extern, return, void, case, float, short,
volatile, char, for, signed, while, const, goto, sizeof, _Bool, continue, if,
static, _Complex, default, inline, struct, _Imaginary, do, int, switch, double,
long, typedef, else, register, union
```

Because of C's case sensitivity, keywords must appear in programs exaclt as sown in table 2.1 with all letters in lowercase
Names of functions in the standard library have only lowercase letters
- Ex. `printf`
