# The `printf` function
- designed to display the contents of the format string with values possibly inserted
- must be supplied with
  - the format string
  - any values to be inserted

- values displayed can be constants, variables, or more complex
- no limit to the number that can be printed by one call of `printf`

Format string can contain ordinary characters and *conversion specifications* which
- begin with %
- placeholder to be filled during printing
- info. following the % -> how the value is converted from internal form (binary) to printed form (characters)
  - that's why it's called a conversion specification
- ex. `%d` == convert an int from binary to a string of decimal digits
- ex. `%f` == convert a float from binary to a string of decimal digits

Ordinary characters are printed exactly as they appear in the string; conversion specs are replaced by their values
Ex.
```
int i,j;
float x,y;

i=10;
j=20;
x=43.2892f;
y=5527.0f;

printf("i = %d, j = %d, x = %f, y = %f\n",i,j,x,y);
```
the `printf` will produce
```
i = 10, j = 20, x = 43.289200, y = 5527.000000
```

C compilers don't have to:

    a) check that the number of conversion specs matches the number of output items.
    Ex.
    ```
    printf("%d %d\n",i); // first value will be i, second will be some random meaningless int
    ```
    and
    ```
    printf("%d %d\n",i);  // prints i but doesn't show j
    ```

    b) check that a conversion spec is appropriate for the type. if you use the wrong type it'll just produce meaningless output.
    ```
    // say i is an int and x is a float, and we've put them in the wrong order as below
    printf("%f %d\n",i,x); 
    // printf will display some random float followed by some random int
    ```

## Conversion Specifications
- control over output appearance
- complicated and hard to read
- can include formatting information 
  - like `%.1f` to show a float to one DP
- generally: a conversion spec can have the form `%m.pX` or `%-m.pX`, where:
  - `m` and `p` are integer constants and `X` is a letter
  - both `m` and `p` are optional
  - if `p` is omitted, the period separating `m` and `p` is also omitted
Ex. In the following conversion specification
```
%10.2f
```
`m` is 10, `p` is 2, `X` is f, but in
```
%10f
```
`m` is 10, `X` is f, and `p` plus the period are missing, however in
```
%.2f
```
`p` is 2, `X` is f, and `m` is missing.

**Minimum field width** *m* == minimum number of characters to print 
- if the value to be printed requires fewer than *m* characters, it's right justified within the field (Extra spaces come before it)
  - ex. `%4d` would display `123` as ` 123` 
  - In this example `m` = 4
- if the value to be printed requires more than *m* characters, the field width automatically expands to the necessary size
  - ex. `%4d` would display `12345` as `12345`
  - In this example `m` = 4
- Putting a minus sign in gtony of *m* causes left justification 
  - ex. `%-4d` would display `123` as `123 ` 

**Precision** *p*
- depends on choice of X (conversion specifier)
- X tells you which conversion should be applied to the value before printing

some common conversion specifiers for numbers:
- `d` - displays an integer in decimal/base 10. 
  - *p* == min number of digits to display with extra zeros added to the beginning of the number if needed
  - *p* omitted == assumed `p = 1`
- `e` - displays a float in exponential format/scientific notation
  - *p* == how many digits should appear after the decimal (default 6)
  - `p = 0` -> decimal point not displayed
- `f` - displays a float in "fixed decimal" format
  - *p* == same meaning as for `e`
- `g` - displays a float in either exponential or fixed decimal format depending on size
  - *p* == max number of sig figs not after the decimal to be displayed
  - unlike f, the g conversion won't show trailing zeros
  - if the value to be printed has no digits after the decimal, g doesn't display the decimal
  - useful for displaying numbers whose size can't be predicted 
- many other specifiers exist but they won't be introduced yet

