# The `scanf` function
- `printf` prints in particular format; `scanf` reads according to particular format
- similarly contains ordinary characters and conversion specs
- conversions allowed with `scanf` are basically same as with `printf`
  - in many cases they contain only conversion specs as below
```
int i,j;
float x,y;

scanf("%d%d%f%f", &i, &j, &x, &y);
```
So if the user enters
```
1   -20 .3  -4.0e3
```
`scanf` will read the line, convert its characters to the numbers they represent, rhen assign `1,-20,0.3` and `-4000.0` to `i,j,k,x` and `y`. 
- "Tightly packed" format strings like above are common. `printf` less likely to cram it in like that

Some traps to avoid just as with `printf`...make sure 
- the number  of input variables matches the number of convesion specs 
- each conversion is appropriate for the variable type
- `&` is usually but not always required. remember it.
  - can be disastrous if you forget
  - crash or at least not store it. retain old value maybe.
  - some compilers will warn *format argument is not a pointer*.
Just like with print, compiler doesn't have to check for mismatches

A lot of pros avoid `scanf` and instead read all data in character form and convert it to numeric form later
- `scanf` will be used here a lot but keep in mind it's gonna die if you give it bad input
- not gonna focus on input guarding in this book cuz it'll obscure the purpose of examples

## How `scanf` works
Can do more than we've seen so far
- basically a pattern matching function that tries to match groups of input characters with conversion specs
- like `printf` it is controlled by the format string
  - called
  - processes info in string, starting at the left
  - for each conversion spec, tries to locate an item of the appropriate type in the input data, skipping blank space if needed
  - reads the item, stopping when it encounters a char that can't possibly belong to the item
  - if item was read successfully, continues processing the rest of the fstring
  - if any item was not read successfully, returns immediately without looking at the rest of the fstring/remaining input data

`scanf` ignores white space characters (space, horizontal/vertical tab, form feed, newline) as it looks for the beginning of a number
- so numbers can be put on a single line or spread out over several
ex.
```
scanf("%d%d%f%f", &i, &j, &x, &y);
```
Let's say a user enters
```
    1
  -20             .3
               -4.0e3
```
`scanf` sees one continuous stream of characters `  1\n-20   .3    -4.0e3\n`
- since it skips white space it will be able to read this successfully
- `scanf` "peeks" at a newline character wuthout actually reading it. this newline will be the first character read by the next call of `scanf`

When asked to read an integer, `scanf`...
- searches for a digit, plus, or minus sign
- reads digits till it reaches a nondigit
  
When asked to read a float, `scanf`...
- looks for a plus or minus sign (optional) followed by
- a series of digits (possibly containing a decimal point) followed by
- an exponent (optional). an exponent consists of the letter `e` or `E`, an optional sign, and one or more digits

in `scanf`, `%e`, `%f` and `%g` are interchangeable. all follow the same rules above for recognizing a float

When `scanf` encounters a character that can't be part of the current item, the character is "put back" to be read again during the scanning of the next input item or during the next call of `scanf`

Example:
we input
```
1-20.3-4.0e3\n
```
let's use
```
scanf("%d%d%f%f", &i, &j, &x, &y);
```
Here's how `scanf` would process that input.
1. conversion spec: %d. first nonblank character is 1; integers can begin with 1. scanf reads next character, -. since - can't be in an integer scanf stores 1 into i and puts the - back.
2. conversion spec: %d. scanf reads the characters -, 2,0, and . (period). int can't contain a decimal point so scanf stores -20 into j and puts the . back.
3. conversion spec: %f. scanf reads the characters .,3, and -. since a float cant contain a - sign after a digit, scanf stores 0.3 into x and puts the - back. 
4. conversion spec: %f. scanf reads -,4,.,0,e,3 and \n. since a float cant contain a newline scanf stores -4.0x10^3 into y and puts the newline back.

Since the newline wasn't read it will be left for the next call of scanf.

## Ordinary characters in format strings
- can take pattern matching a step further
- when scanf processes an ordinary character in a format string, it does smth diff depending on whether or not it is white space
  - white space: 
    - one or more consecutive white space chars -> repeatedly reads white space till it reaches a non white space character which is "put back"
    - one white space char in the format string will match any number of white space chars in the input
    - putting a white space char in a format string doesn't force the input to contain white space chars. it matches ANY number including none.
  - other characters:
    - non white space -> compares it with the next input character
    - if they match, discards the input and continues processing the format string
    - if they don't match, puts the offending character back into the input then aborts without further processing the format string or reading input characters
Ex. let's say the format string is `"%d/%d"`. if the input is ` 5/ 96` scanf will skip the first space, then find an integer (5), match 5 with %d, match / with /, skip a space, then find another int, match %d with 96.

On the other hand if the input is ` 5 / 96` scanf skips a space, matches %d with 5, then attempts to match the / in the format string with a space in the input. no match so scanf puts the space back and the ` / 96` remain to be read by the next call of scanf. 
- to allow spaces after the first number we should use this format string instead `"%d /%d"`
  
## Confusing `printf` with `scanf`
- don't
- common mistake is to use & with printf. 
  - ex. `printf("%d %d\n", &i, &j); //wrong`
  - in this case printf will display some odd numbers instead of the values of `i` and `j` 
- since scanf normally skips white space, the format strings dont need characters other than conversion specs. they don't need to resemble printf strings. if you do that it might behave weird. 
  - ex. `scanf("%d, %d", &i, &j);
  - scanf will first look for an int in the input -> store it in i. then try to match a comma with the next input character. if the next input is a space, not a comma, it will terminate without reading for j.
- also don't put `\n` at the end of scanf the way you tend to do with printf.
  - to scanf a new line means a space. this will cause it to advance to the next non white space character.
  - ex. `"%d\n"` scanf will skip white space, read an integer, then skip to the next non white space character. so this can cause the program to hang till the user enters a nonblank character
