## Arithmetic Operators

- perform addition, subtraction, multiplication, division

unary == require one operand
- plus +
- minus -
ex. `i = +1` and `j = -i`

binary == require two operands 
    additive
    - addition +
    - subtraction - 
    multiplicative
    - multiplication *
    - division /
    - remainder %

Unary + does nothing
- the value of `i%j` is the remainder when `i` is divided by `j` 
- ex. `10%3` is `1` and `12%4` is `0`

- All the binary operators except % allow either integer or floating point operands, with mixing allowed
- When int and float are mixed, the result is float
- ex. `9 + 2.5f = 11.5` and `6.7f / 2 = 3.35`

The `/` and `%` operators require special care:
- / can produce surprising results
  - Both operands int == truncates the result by dropping the fractional part
  - ex. `1/2 = 0` not `0.5`
- % needs integer operands. if either is not an integer it won't compile.
- zero as the right operand of either / or % will make it do weird stuff
- negative operands...
  - C89 says if either operand is negative the result of a division can be rounded either up or down.
    - ex. `-9/7` could be either `-1` or `-2` 
  - if i or j is negative the sign of `i % j` in C89 depends on the implementation
    - ex. `-9 % 7` could be either `-2` or `5` 
    - Question why 5
  - in C99 the result of a division is always truncated toward 0
    - so `-9 / 7 = -1` and `i % j` has the same sign as `i` so `-9 % 7` is `-2`

## Implementation-defined behaviour
- C standard deliberately leaves some parts of the language unspecified
- implementation will fill in the details
- so the behaviour of a program might vary from one implementation to another
- The / and % is an example of this in C89
- might seem odd or dangerous to do this b ut that's just C
  - goal of efficiency -> matching the way the hardware behaves
  - some CPUs yield -1 when -9 is divided by 7 while others produce -2; C89 just reflects this
- Best to avoid writing programs that depend on implementation defined behaviour. if not just be careful and document it.

## Operator Precedence and Associativity
- more than one operator?
- BEDMAS issue
- can use parenteses to group expressions
- If we don't what happens?
  - C uses operator precedence rules to resolve these issues
  - Here's the precedence:

```
Highest: + - (unary)
         * / %
Lowest:  + - (binary)
```

Operators listed on the same line above have equal precedence

- When two or more operators appear in the same expression we can determine how the compiler will interpret it by repeatedly putting parentheses around subexpressions from high to low precedence operators 
- Ex.

```
i + j * k == i + (j*k)
-i * -j == (-i) * (-j)
+i + j / k == (+i) + (j/k)
```

Operator precedence isn't enough if an expression contains two or more operators at the same level of precedence
- Associativity of the operators comes into play 

Left-associative == operator groups from left to right
- binary arithmetic operators are all left associative
```
i - j - k == (i - j) - k
i * j / k == ( i* j) / k
```

Right-associative == groups from right to left
- unary are right associative
```
- + i == -(+i)
```

