# Assignment Operators

- `=` is called the simple assignment operator

## Simple assignment
- the effect of `v = e` is to evaluate the expression *e* and copy its value into *v*
  - it's like discrete
- *e* can be a constant, variable, or complex expression
```
i = 5; // now i is 5
j = i; // now j is 5
k = 10 * i + j; // now k is 55
```

if *v* and *e* have different types then *e* is converted to the type of *v* as the assignment takes place

```
int i;
float f;

i = 72.99f; // now i is 72
f = 136; // now if is 136.0
```

- assignment is a statement in many languages
- in C, though, it's an operator
  - i.e. the act of assignemnt produces a result just like adding two numbers produces a result
  - the valye of the assignment `v = e` is the value of `v` right after the assignment
  - so the value of `i = 72.99f` is `72`. not `72.99`

## Side effects
- most C operators don't modify their operands but some do
- we say these have 'side effects'
- simple assignment has side effects; modifies its left operand
- ex. `i=0` produces the result `0`, and as a result (side effect) assigns `0` to `i`

- it's an operator:
- you can chain several assignments together
- it's right associative
- chaining with conversion can do things unexpectedly

Generally an assignment of the form `v = e` is allowed wherever a value of type `v` would be permitted
```
i = 1;
k = 1 + (j = i);
printf("%d %d %d\n",i,j,k); // prints "1 1 2"
```
Usually not a good idea to do that
it's hard to read and also they can cause subtle bugs

## Lvalues
- most C operators allow their operands to be variables, constants, or expressions containing other operators
- Assignment however requires an *lvalue* as its left operand
  - pronounced L-value
  - object stored in computer memory, not a constant or the result of a computation
  - variables are lvalues, expressions like 10 or 2 * i are not. 
  - illegal to put any other kind of expression on the left side of an assignment
  
## Compound assignment
- common to see assignments that use the old value of a variable to compute its new value
  - ex. `i = i + 2;`
- C's compound assignment operators let us shorten the syntax
  - ex. `i += 2`
- There are nine compound assignment operators including these: 
  - `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`
  - They all work in the same way ish
- Technically `v += e` is not "equivalent" to `v = v + e`.
  - operator precedence: i *= j + k isn't the same as i = i * j + k
  - Also sometimes if *v* itself has a side effect `v += e` wont be the same as `v = v + e`
- careful not to mix the order like `=+` or something. can produce things that are acceptabe to the compiler but also don't have the right meaning. Ex. `i += j` being mistaken for `i =+ j` will produce `i = (+j)`
- They have the same properties as the `=` operator
  - right associative
  - ex. `i += j += k;` means `i += (j += k);`

## Increment and decrement operators
